The Pleasure of Finding Things Out
Richard Feynman -- PBS NOVA Documentary (1981)

I have a friend who's an artist, and he's sometimes taken a view which I don't agree with very well.
He'll hold up a flower and say, look how beautiful it is, and I'll agree.
And he says, you see, as I as an artist can see how beautiful this is, but you as a scientist, oh, take this all apart and it becomes dull thing.
And I think that he's kind of nutty.
First of all, the beauty that he sees is available to other people and to me too.
I believe, although I may not be quite as refined as aesthetically as he is, that I can't appreciate the beauty of a flower.
At the same time, I see much more about the flower than he sees.
I could imagine the cells in there, the complicated actions, which also have a beauty.
I mean, it's not just beauty at this dimension of one centimeter.
There's also beauty at a smaller dimensions, the inner structure, also the processes,
the fact that the colors and the flower evolved in order to attract insects to pollinate it is interesting.
It means that insects can see the color.
It adds a question.
Does this aesthetic sense also exist in the lower forms?
Why is it aesthetic?
All kinds of interesting questions which the science knowledge only adds to the excitement and mystery in the awe of a flower.
It only adds. I don't understand how it subtracts.
I've always been rather very one-sided about the science and when I was younger, I concentrated almost all my effort on it.
I didn't have time to learn and I had no much patience with what's called the humanities,
even though in the university there were humanities that you had to take.
I tried my best to avoid somehow to learn anything and to work at it.
It's only afterwards when I've gotten older and I've more relaxed that I've spread out a little bit.
I've learned to draw and I read a little bit, but I'm really still a very one-sided person and don't know a great deal.
I have a limited intelligence and I've used it in a particular direction.
Richard Phillips Feynman was born and brought up in New York.
His father was intensely curious about science and the natural world.
He had a profound and enduring influence on his son.
It's true that my father, even before I was born, told my mother that if it was a boy, he was going to be a scientist.
And he made an effort in a way to produce that, so I had no doubt that had a lot to do with it.
I think it does.
When I was just a little kid, just very small in the high chair,
he had brought home a lot of tiles, little bathroom tiles, seconds of different colors that he'd brought home.
And we played with them setting up like dominoes, I mean vertically, on my high chair thing.
They tell me this anyway.
And then when we got them all set up, I would push one end so that they would all go down.
But then after a while with the setup, I helped set them up.
Then pretty soon we were setting them up in a more complicated way.
Two white tiles and a blue tile, two white tiles and a blue tile and so on.
And my mother says that she complained, leave the poor child alone.
He wants to put a blue tile in and put a blue tile.
And he said, no, I want to show them what patterns are like and how interesting they are,
as it's a kind of elementary mathematics.
So he started very early to tell me about the world and how interesting it was.
We had the Encyclopedia Britannica at home.
And even when I was a small boy, he used to sit me on his lap and read to me from the Encyclopedia Britannica.
And we would say about dinosaurs.
And maybe it would be talking about the Brontosaurus or something.
And he would say something like, or the Tyrannosaurus rex.
And it would say something like this thing is 25 feet high and the head is six feet across.
And he'd stop always and say, let's see what that means.
That would mean that if he stood in our front yard, he would be high enough to put his head through the window.
But not quite because the head is a little bit too wide.
It would break the window as it came by.
Everything we read would be translated as best we could into some reality so that I learned to do that.
And everything I read, I tried to figure out what it really means, what it's really saying by translating.
And so I used to get read the Encyclopedia when I was a boy, but with translation, you see.
So it was very exciting and interesting to think that there was animals of such magnitude.
I wasn't frightened that there would be one coming in my window as a consequence of this, I don't think.
But I thought it was very, very interesting and that they all died out.
And at that time, nobody knew why.
We used to go to the Catskill Mountains.
We lived in New York and the Catskill Mountains is a place where people went in the summer.
There was a big group of people there.
But the fathers would all go back to New York to work during the week and only come back over in the weekend.
And on the weekends when my father came, he would take me for walks in the woods and would tell me various things
about interesting things that were going on in the woods, which I'll explain in a minute.
But the other mothers seemed, of course, thought that was wonderful and that their other fathers should take their sons for walks.
So they tried to work on them, but they didn't get anywhere at first.
And they wanted my father to take all the kids, but he didn't want to because he had a special relationship to me.
We were a personal thing together.
So it ended up that the other fathers had to take their children for walks the next weekend.
And the next Monday when they were all back to work, all the kids were playing in a field.
And one kid said to me, see that bird? What kind of a bird is that?
And I said, I'm the slightest idea what kind of a bird it is.
He says it's a brown-throated thrush or something.
He says your father doesn't tell you anything, but it was the opposite.
My father had taught me, looking at a bird, he says, do you know what that bird is?
It's a brown-throated thrush.
But in Portuguese, it's a ontaratero, in Italian, a tutera picchita.
He says in Chinese, it's a chung-a-on-tang.
In Japanese, it's a patata-tukodacha, et cetera.
He says now they've known all the languages you want to know what the name of that bird is.
And when you're finished with all that, he says you'll know absolutely nothing, whatever, about the bird.
You only know about humans in different places and what they call the bird.
Now he says, let's look at the bird and what it's doing.
Once we were again walking somewhere and he picked a leaf off of a tree or something.
And this leaf had a floor thing you never look at much, but a little brown line
that started in the middle of the leaf, like a sea shape.
You've seen, they're sort of deteriorated, the leaf's got brown from something.
And this little brown line was like a shape of a sea, starting somewhere in the middle of the leaf
and then a curl and came to the edge.
And he said, now you look at this and he said, you see, if it's narrow at the beginning
and it gets wider as it goes to the edge.
Now what this is, he said, is that a fly has come, a blue fly with the yellow eyes
and the green wings come and lays an egg on this leaf.
Then when the egg hatches into a small caterpillar, like the maggot like thing,
which as the whole life eating this leaf, that's where it gets its food is why the egg is left there.
And as it eats along, it leaves behind this trail of eaten leaf, which is brown.
And as the maggot grows, you see, the trail gets wider until he's grown to full length
and at the end of the leaf, where he turns into a fly, a blue fly with yellow eyes and green wings
who flies away and lays an egg on another leaf.
Now I knew that he didn't know that it was a blue fly with green wings with yellow eyes,
but the idea, or even if it was really precisely correct, it might have even been a beetle
and it had nothing, but the idea that he was trying to tell me was the amusing part of life
that the whole thing is just reproduction, no matter how complicated the business is about.
The main point is to do it again, is to have it come out again.
He had taught me to notice things.
And one day when I was playing with what we call an express wagon,
which is a little wagon for children to play with that they can pull around,
it had a ball in it.
I remember this, it had a ball in it.
And I pulled the wagon and I noticed something about the way the ball moved.
So I went to my father and I said, say, pal, I noticed something.
When I pulled the wagon, the ball rolls to the back of the wagon, it rushes to the back of the wagon.
And when I'm pulling along and I suddenly stop, the ball rolls to the front of the wagon.
I said, why is that?
And he said, that, he says, nobody knows.
He said, the general principle is that things that are moving try to keep on moving
and things that are standing still tend to stand still unless you push on them hard.
And he says, this tendency is called inertia where nobody knows why it's true.
Now that's a deep understanding.
He doesn't give me a name.
He knew the difference between knowing the name of something and knowing something,
which I learned very, very early.
He went on to say, if you look close, you'll find the ball does not rush to the back of the wagon,
but it's the back of the wagon that you're pulling against the ball, that the ball stands still.
It was a matter of fact from the friction starts to move forward really and doesn't move back.
So I ran back to the little wagon and set the ball up again and pulled the wagon from under it
and looking sideways and seeing indeed he was right.
The ball never moved backwards in the wagon when I pulled the wagon forward.
It moved backward relative to the wagon, but relative to the sidewalk, it was moved forward a little bit.
It's just the wagon caught up with it.
So that's the way I was educated by my father with those kind of examples and discussions.
No pressure, just lovely, interesting discussion.
My cousin at that time was three years old.
He was in high school and was having considerable difficulty with his algebra and had a tutor come.
I was allowed to sit in the corner while a tutor would try to teach my cousin algebra.
So problems like 2x plus...
I said to my cousin there, I said, what are you trying to do?
I hear him talk about x.
He said, well, you know, 2x plus 7 is equal to 15.
He said, you're trying to find out what x is.
I said, you mean 4.
He says, yeah, but you did it with arithmetic.
You have to do it by algebra.
And that's why my cousin was never able to do algebra because he didn't understand how he was supposed to do it.
There was no way I learned algebra, fortunately, by not going to school.
By knowing the whole idea was to find out what x was, and it didn't make any difference how you did it.
There's no such a thing as you don't do it by arithmetic, you do it by algebra.
It was a false thing that they had invented in school so that the children who have to study algebra can all pass it.
They had invented a set of rules which, if you followed them without thinking, could produce the answers.
Subtract 7 from both sides.
If you have a multiplier, divide both sides by the multiplier and so on.
A series of steps by which you could get the answer if you didn't understand what you were trying to do.
There was a series of math books which starts arithmetic for the practical man and then algebra for the practical man
and then trigonometry for the practical man.
And I learned trigonometry for the practical man from that.
I soon forgot it again because I didn't understand it very well.
But they were going to get the series coming out and the library was going to get calculus for the practical man.
And I knew by this time, by reading the Encyclopedia, that calculus was an important subject and it was an interesting one.
And I want to learn it.
This was, I was older now, I was perhaps 13.
And then the calculus book finally came out and I was so excited and I went to the library and to take it out.
And she looks at me and she says, you're just a child, what are you taking this book out for?
This book is one of the few times in my life I was uncommonly lied.
I said it was for my father, his son.
So I took it home and I learned calculus from it.
And I tried to explain it to my father.
And he started to read the beginning of it and he found it confusing.
And it really bothered, that bothered me a little bit.
I didn't know that he was so limited, you know, he didn't understand.
And I thought it was relatively simple and straightforward and he didn't understand it.
So that was the first time I knew I had learned more in some sense than he.
One of the things that my father taught me beside physics, whether it's correct or not,
is disrespect for respectable, for certain kinds of things.
For example, when I was a little boy and a rotor gravure that's printed pictures in newspapers
first came out in the New York Times.
He used to sit me again on his knee and he opened a picture and there was a picture of the pope
with everybody bowing in front of him.
And he'd say, now look at these humans, he'd say.
Here's one human standing here and all these others are bowing.
Now what is the difference?
This one is the pope and the other one, maybe he hated the pope anyway.
He'd say, the difference is epaulets, of course, not in the case of the pope.
Maybe it was a general.
It was always the uniform, the position that this man has the same human problems he
didn't like anybody else.
He goes to the bathroom, he has the same kind of problems as everybody.
He's a human being.
Why are they all bowing to him?
Only because of his name and his position, because of his uniform,
not because of something he especially did or his honor or something like that.
He, by the way, was in the uniform business.
So he knew what the difference was with the man with the uniform off and the uniform on.
It's the same man for him.
He was happy with me, I believe.
Once though, when I came back from MIT and been there a few years,
he said to me, now he said, you become educated about these things.
And there's one question I've always had that I've never really understood very well.
And I'd like to ask you now that you've studied this to explain it to me.
And I asked him what it was.
And he said that he understood that when an atom made a transition from one state to another,
it emits a particle of light called a photon.
That's right.
He says, well now, is the photon in the atom ahead of time that it comes out,
or is there no photon in start with?
I said, there's no photon in it.
It's just that the electron makes a transition that comes out.
He said, well, then where does it come from?
Then how does it come out?
So I said, of course, I couldn't answer him.
The view is that photons' numbers aren't conserved.
They're just created by the motion of the electron.
I couldn't try to explain it to him something like that.
The sound that I'm making now wasn't in me.
It's not like my little boy is.
And when he was just little, one day he started to talk.
He was talking.
And he suddenly said that he could no longer say a certain word.
The word was cat because his word bag has run out of the word cat.
So there's no word bag that you have inside that you use up the words as they come out.
You just make them as they go along.
And in the same sense, there was no photon bag in an atom.
And when the photons came out, they didn't come from somewhere,
but couldn't do much better.
He was not satisfied with me in that respect.
And I never was able to explain any of the things that he didn't understand.
So he was unsuccessfully sent me through all these universities
in order to find out these things and never did find out.
While researching his PhD thesis at Princeton
on the principle of least action in quantum mechanics,
young Feynman was asked to join the project to develop the atomic bomb.
It was a completely different kind of a thing.
It would mean that I would have to stop the research in what I was doing,
which is my life's desire to take time off to do this,
which I felt I should do in order to protect civilization if you want.
So that was what I had to debate with myself.
My first reaction was I didn't want to get interrupted in my normal work
to do this odd job.
There was also the problem, of course, of any moral thing involving war.
I had much to do with that, but it kind of scared me
when I realized what the weapon would be, which I realized,
and that since it might be possible, it would be possible.
There was nothing that I knew that indicated that if we could do it,
they couldn't do it, and therefore it was very important to try to cooperate.
So, in early 1943, Richard Feynman joined Robert Oppenheimer's team of scientists
at Los Alamos, New Mexico.
With regard to moral questions, I do have something I would like to say about it,
because the original reason to start the project, which I had,
which was the Germans were in danger,
started me on a process of action which was to try to develop this.
First the system in Princeton, then at Los Alamos to try to make the bomb work,
all kinds of attempts to redesign to make it a worse bomb or whatever and so on
and all working all this time to see if we can make it go.
And so it was a project in which we all worked very, very hard
and all cooperating together.
With any project like that, you continue to work trying to get success,
having decided to do it.
But what I did immorally, I would say,
was not to remember the reason that I said I was doing it,
so that when the reason changed, which was that Germany was defeated,
not the singles thought came to my mind at all about that,
that that meant now that I had to reconsider why I'm continuing to do this.
I simply didn't think, okay?
The reaction I remember, perhaps I was blinded by my own reaction,
was a very considerable elation and excitement
and there was corner parties and people got drunk
and it would make a tremendously interesting contrast
of what was going on in Los Alamos
at the same time as what was going on in Hiroshima.
I was involved with this happy thing and also drinking and drunk
and playing drums, sitting on the hood of a bonnet
of a jeep and playing drums and excitement running all over Los Alamos
at the same time as the people were dying and struggling in Hiroshima.
I had a very strong reaction after the war of a peculiar nature.
It may be from just the bomb itself and it may be for some other psychological reasons
I had just lost my wife or something,
but I remember being in New York with my mother in a restaurant
right after, immediately, and thinking about New York
and I knew how big the bomb in Hiroshima was,
how big an area it covered and so on
and I realized from where we were, I don't know, 59th Street,
you drop one at 34th Street and it would spread all the way out there
and all these people would be killed
and all the things would be killed
and that wasn't only one bomb available
but it was easy to continue to make them
and therefore that things were sort of doomed
because already it appeared to me, very early, earlier than to others
who were more optimistic, that international relations
and the way people were behaving was no different
than it had ever been before
and that it was just going to go out the same way as any other thing
and I was sure it was going to therefore to be used very soon.
So I felt very uncomfortable and thought, really believed
that it was silly I would see people building a bridge
and I would say they don't understand, I really believe
that it was senseless to make anything
because it would all be destroyed very soon anyway
but they didn't understand that
and I had this very strange view of any construction that I would see
I would always thought how foolish they are to try to make something
so I was really in a kind of depressive condition.
Feynman decided to accept an appointment
at Cornell University's Department of Theoretical Physics
where he would work with Hans Bethe.
He had turned down a prestigious position
offered by Princeton's Institute for Advanced Study
much to their surprise and consternation.
They expected me to be wonderful to offer me a job like this
and I wasn't wonderful and therefore I knew principle
because I'm not responsible
what other people think I'm able to do.
I don't have to be good because they think I'm going to be good
and somehow or other I could relax about this
and I thought to myself I haven't done anything important
well I'm never going to do anything important
but I used to enjoy physics and mathematical things
and because I used to play with it
it was never very important
but I used to do things for the fun of it
so I decided I'm going to do things only for the fun of it
and only that afternoon when I was eating lunch
some kid threw up a plate in the cafeteria
which has a blue medallion on the plate
the Cornell sign in the cafeteria
and as he threw up the plate and it came down
it wobbled and the blue thing went around like this
and I wondered it seemed to me
the blue thing went around faster than the wobble
and I wondered what the relation was between the two
I was just playing, no importance at all
so I played around with the equations of motion
of rotating things
and I found out that if the wobble is small
the blue thing goes around twice as fast
as the wobble goes around
and then I tried to figure out if I could see why that was
directly from Newton's laws
instead of through the complicated equations
and I worked that out for the fun of it
and then I went to Hans beta
and I said hey by the way I show you
something amusing and I explained this to him
and he said to me it's very amusing and interesting
he said but what is the use of it
I said that doesn't make any use
I'm just doing it for the fun of it
and then Bob Wilson who was the head of the nuclear lab there
the same Bob Wilson
had some kind of instinct or something
because it was at the same day or other
that he called me and he told me
that when they hire a professor at the university
it's their responsibility what the professor does
and it's their risk and if he doesn't do anything
or he doesn't accomplish anything
it's not his thing to worry about that
they're taking the risk to put him in the environment
and do whatever I want
amuse myself or whatever I want
so with that double combination
I could relax somehow
I was getting out from some psychological problem
and I relaxed and started to play it
as I said with the rotation
and this rotation led me to the problem
a similar problem of the rotation
of the spin of an electron
according to Dirac's equation
and that just led me back into quantum
electrodynamics which is the problem
I'd been working on
continuing now to play with it
in the relaxed fashion I had originally done
and everything is just like
in a cork out of a bottle
everything just poured out
by the way in a very short order
worked the things out for which I later won
the Nobel Prize
Feynman was awarded a Nobel Prize
for his work in quantum electrodynamics
well what I essentially did
and also was done independently
by two other people
also independent Tomonaga
and Schwinger
was to figure out how to
analyze how to control
analyze and discuss
the original theory of quantum
quantum theory of electricity and magnetism
that has been written in 1928
how to interpret it
so as to avoid the infinities
to make calculations
in which there were sensible results
which have since turned out
to be an exact agreement
with every experiment that's been done so far
so that in quantum electrodynamics
we have a theory
which fits experiment in every detail
where it's applicable
not involving nuclear forces for instance
and it was a
the work
that I did in 1947 to
figure out how to do that
for which I won the Nobel Prize
and what does the Nobel Prize mean
to Feynman
I said
I don't know anything about the Nobel Prize
I don't understand what it's all about
or what's worth what
and if the people in the Swedish Academy
decide that X, Y or Z wins the Nobel Prize
then so be it
I won't have anything to do with the Nobel Prize
it's a pain in the neck
I don't like honors
I appreciate it for the work that I did
and for people who appreciate it
and I notice other physicists use my work
I don't need
anything else
I don't think there's any sense to anything else
I don't see that it makes any point
that someone
in the Swedish Academy decides that this work
is noble enough to receive a prize
I've already got the prize
the prize is the pleasure of finding the thing out
the kick in the discovery
the observation of other people
use it
those are the real things
the honors are unreal
to me
I don't believe in honors
it bothers me honors bothers me
let's honors as uniforms
my papa brought me up this way
I can't stand it it hurts me
when I was in high school
one of the first honors I got
was to be a member of the Arista
which is a group
of kids who got good grades
hmm
everybody wanted to be a member of the Arista
and when I got into the Arista
I discovered that what they did in their meetings
was to sit around
to discuss who else was worthy
to join this wonderful group
that we are
ok so we sat around
trying to decide who it was
who would get to be allowed in to the Arista
this kind of thing
bothers me psychologically
for one or another reason I don't understand myself
honors
and from that day to this
always bothered me
I had trouble with
when I became a member of the National Academy of Science
and I had ultimately to resign
there was another organization
most of whose time was spent
choosing who was illustrious enough
to join, to be allowed to join us
an organization
including such questions as
we physicists have to stick together
because there's a very good chemist that they're trying to get in
and we haven't got enough room for social
what's the matter with chemists
the whole thing was rotten
because the purpose was mostly
to decide who could have this honor
ok I don't like honors
since 1950
Feynman has been professor of theoretical physics
at the California Institute of Technology
where he lectures
and does his physics
trying to figure out more about the world
and how it works
one way it's kind of a
fun analogy to try to get some idea
what we're doing and try to understand nature
is to imagine
that the gods are playing
some great game like chess
let's say a chess game
with the rules of the game
but you're allowed to look at the board
at least from time to time
and in a little corner perhaps
and from these observations
you try to figure out what the rules are
of the game
what the rules of the piece is moving
you might discover after a bit for example
that when there's only one bishop
around on the board
that the bishop maintains its color
later on you might discover the law
for the bishop as it moves on a diagonal
that's understood before that it maintains its color
and that would be analogous to
we discover one law and then later
find a deeper understanding of it
then
things can happen everything's going good
you got all the laws it looks very good
and then all of a sudden some strange phenomenon occurs
in some corner
so you begin to investigate that to look for it
it's castling something you didn't expect it
we're always by the way
in a fundamental physics
always trying to investigate those things
we don't understand the conclusions
we're not trying to check all the time our conclusions
after we check them enough we're okay
the thing that doesn't fit
is the thing that's the most interesting
part that doesn't go according to what you expected
also we could have
revolutions in physics
after you've been noticed that the bishops
maintain their color and they go along the diagonals
and so on
for such a long time
and everybody knows that that's true
then you suddenly discover one day
in a chess game that the bishop doesn't
maintain its color it changes its color
only later do you discover
a new possibility
that the bishop is captured
and that a pawn went all the way down to the queen's
end to produce a new bishop
that can happen but you didn't know it
and so it's a very analogous to
the way our laws are
they sometimes look positive they keep on
working and all of a sudden some little gimmick
shows that they're wrong and then we have to
investigate the conditions under which
bishop change of color
happen and so forth
and gradually learn the new rule
that explains it more deeply
unlike the chess game though
in the case of the chess game
the rules become more complicated as you go along
but in the physics
when you discover new things
it looks more simple
it appears on the whole to be more complicated
because we learn about a greater experience
that is we learn about more particles
and new things and so the laws look complicated
again but if you realize
all the time what's kind of wonderful
it has to be expand our experience
into wilder and wilder regions
of experience every once in a while
we have these integrations in which everything is
pulled together in a unification
which it turns out to be simpler than it looked
before
if you're interested in the ultimate
character of physical world
the real or the complete world
and at the present time
our only way to understand that
is through a mathematical type of reasoning
then I don't think a person
can fully appreciate
or in fact can appreciate much
of these particular aspects
of the world
the great depth and character
the universality of the laws
the relationships of things
without an understanding of
mathematics
I don't know any other way to do it
we don't know any other way to describe it
accurately and well or to see the interrelationships
without it
so I don't think a person
who hasn't developed some mathematical sense
is capable of fully appreciating
this aspect of the world
don't misunderstand me
there are many many aspects of the world
that mathematics is unnecessary
for such as love
and which are very delightful and wonderful
to appreciate and to be
awed and mysterious about
and I don't mean to say that the only thing in the world
is physics but
you were talking about physics
and if that's what you're talking about
then to not know mathematics
is a severe limitation
in understanding the world
what I'm working on in physics
right now is a special problem
which we've come up against
and I didn't describe what it is
you know that everything is made out of atoms
we've got that far already
and most people know that already
and that the atom has a nucleus
the behavior of the electrons
on the outside is now completely
the laws for it
are well understood as far as we can tell
and this quantum electrodynamics
that I told you about
and after that was evolved then the problem was
how does the nucleus work
how are the particles interact
how do they hold together
one of the byproducts was to discover fission
and to make bomb
but it investigating the forces
that hold the nuclear particles together
and it was thought that was an exchange
of some sort of particles inside
which were invented by Yukawa called pions
and it would be predicted
that if you would hit protons
against the proton as one of the particles
against the nucleus
it would knock out such pions
and sure enough such particles came out
not only pions came out
but other particles and we began to run out of names
and caons and sigmas
and lambdas and so on
these are all called hadrons now
as we increase the energy in the reaction
got more and more different kinds
until there were hundreds of different kinds of particles
then the problem was of course
during all this period
from 1940 or 50 up to
toward the present
was to find the pattern behind it
and there seemed to be very many interesting relations
among the particles
patterns among the particles
until a theory
was evolved to explain these patterns
that all of these particles were really made
they were made of
a thing called quarks
and that
three quarks for example
would form a proton
proton is one of the particles of nucleus
another one is a neutron
the quarks came in a number of varieties
in fact at first only three
were needed to explain all the hundreds of particles
and the different kinds of quarks
they were called U type, D type, S type
two U's and a D made a proton
two D's and a U made a neutron
if they were moving in a different way inside
they were some other particle
and so on
then the problem came
what is the behavior
exactly the behavior of the quarks
and what holds them together
and the theory was
thought of which is
a very simple analogy to quantum
electrodynamics a very close analogy
to quantum electrodynamics
not exactly the same but very close
in which the quarks are like the electron
and the photons
which go between electrons which makes them
attract each other electrically
were called gluons the mathematics was very similar
but it's a few terms slightly different
the difference in the form of the equations
that were guessed at
were guessed by principles
by such beauty and simplicity
that it isn't arbitrary
it's very very determined
what is arbitrary is how many
different kinds of quarks there are
but not the character
or the force between them
now unlike electrodynamics
there's a thing in electron
two electrons can be pulled apart
as far as you want it's fact when they're very far away
the force is weakened
if this were true and if these were made out of quarks
you would have expected that when you hit things
together hard enough the quarks would come out
but instead of that
when you do an experiment with enough energy
that quarks could come out instead of that
you found a big jet that is all particles
going about the same direction of the old hadrons
and the theory
it was clear that what was required
was that when the quark comes out
it kind of makes these new pairs of quarks
and they come in little groups
and make hadrons
the question is why is it so different
than electrodynamics
how do these small terms different
these little terms that are different in the equation
produce such different effects
entirely different effects
in fact it was very surprising to most people
that this would really come out
at first you would think the theory was wrong
but the more it's studied the more clear it became
that it's very possible
that these extra terms
would produce these effects
now we're in a position that's different in history
than any other time in physics
it's always different
we have a theory
a complete and definite theory
of all of these hadrons
and we have an enormous number of experiments
and lots and lots of details
why can't we test the theory right away
because what we have to do
is calculate consequences of the theory
if this theory is right what should happen
and does that happen
when this time the difficulty is in the first step
if the theory is right
what should happen
is very hard to figure out
the mathematics needed to
figure out what the consequences of this theory are
have turned out to be
at the present time insuperably difficult
at the present time
alright and therefore
obvious what my problem is
my problem is to try to develop
a way
of getting numbers out of this
theory to test it
really carefully
not just qualitatively does it look like I might give
the right result
I spent a few years trying to invent mathematical
things that would permit me
to solve the equations and I didn't get anywhere
and then I decided
roughly how it worked
and so I've been working
personally last year or two
on understanding roughly how it works
not quantitatively yet
with the hope that in the future
that rough understanding
can be refined into a precise
mathematical two way
an algorithm to get from the theory
to the particles
you see we're in a funny position it's not that we're looking for the theory
we've got the theory
a good candidate
but we're in the step in science
that we need to compare the theory to experiment
by seeing what the consequences are
and checking them we're stuck
in seeing what the consequences are
and it's my aim it's my desire
to see if I can work out
a way to work out what the consequences
of this theory are
it's kind of a crazy position to be in
to have a theory that you can't work out
the consequences of
I can't stand it I have to figure it out
someday maybe
and when he has figured it out
what difference will it make
what is the use of this obsession with physics
let's take
an example which is easier to understand
an example of astronomy
to find out about
of course in the very beginning of astronomy
was the interest in the planets
because of their magic godlike
character perhaps
whatever
after the planets have worked out in the locations of a few stars
there's no more applications of astronomy
there were for time and for navigation
but that's over
finding out about the sizes of the stars
the distance of the stars
the enormity of the galaxies the history of the universe
all this stuff
these marvelous things out there
with the big telescopes and all this stuff
absolutely no application
none
there's no where that I know anywhere
except perhaps that you can put the name
galaxy crisps
on a package of crisps or something
but aside from that I don't know
there are any applications of all this knowledge
about astronomy
there's never been any question however
of supporting telescopes
and trying to get more information about the universe
there is somehow deep
inside of humans a motivation
to understand the universe
I've used an example of astronomy
the same in mathematics the same in physics
and this
motivation
this difference between
thinking everything has to be useful
has to have something to do with what I'm eating
and it has something to do with what I'm thinking
and I'd like to know more
is a thing I think
which has its own motivation
now at the present time it may be possible
and it probably is
that in physics of high energy
where they are again
as far as I can see no applications
the highest energy physics trying to find
the fundamental laws at the
tiniest dimension
a very expensive apparatus
and I don't see any applications
of course in all history
you can always look back
at these foolish scientists who say
what we're finding out now has no application
so in order to make the future
it's happy
the people of the future just as happy as we've been looking back
I'm going to make the prediction
there's no application whatever
of what we're finding out about high energy physics
so you can find me wrong
in the future
but I don't think there is any application really
for a long long time
to do the kind of
high real good physics
work you do need
absolute solid lengths of time
it's when you're putting ideas together
which are vague and hard to remember
it's very much that I get this feeling
very much like building those houses of cards
where you're putting together
on each of the cards is shaky
and if you forget one of them the whole thing collapses again
you don't know how you got there
and you have to build them up again
and if you're interrupted
you don't have the idea of how the cards went together
cards being different type
parts of the ideas
ideas of different kinds have to go together
to build up the idea, the main point
you put the stuff together
it's quite a tower
and it's easy to slip
it needs a lot of concentrating
that is solid time to think
and if you got a job in administrating anything
like that then you don't have the solid time
so I have invented another myth
for myself
I'm actively irresponsible
I tell everybody
I don't do anything
if anybody asked me to be on a committee
to take care of admissions
no, I'm irresponsible
I don't give a damn about the students
of course I give a damn about the students
but I know that somebody else will do it
and I take the view
let George do it
a view which you're not supposed to take
because that's not right to do
but I do that
I want to see, I like to do physics
and I want to see if I can still do it
and so I'm selfish
okay, I want to do my physics
all those students are in the class
now you ask me
how should I best teach them
should I teach them from the point of view of the history
the applications for me
my theory is
that the best way to teach is to have no philosophy
is to be chaotic
and confused in the sense
that you use every possible way
of doing it
that's the only way I can see to answer it
so as to catch this guy or that guy
on different hooks as you go along
during the time when the fellow who was interested
in history is being bored by the abstract
mathematics
on the other hand the fellow who likes abstraction
is being bored of another time by the history
if you can do it so you don't bore them all
all the time
I really don't know how to do it
I don't know how to answer this question
of different kinds of minds with different kinds
of interests
what hooks them on
what makes them interested
how do you direct them to become interested
one way is by a kind of force
you have to pass this course
you have to take that examination
it's a very effective way
many people go through schools that way
maybe the more effective way
I'm sorry
after many many years of trying to teach
and trying all different kinds of methods
I really don't know how to do it
so I try to tell my son
things that were interesting
about the world
when he was very small I used to rock him to bed
when he goes to bed I tell him stories
and I make up stories about little people
that were about so high would walk
along
they would go on picnics and so on they lived in the ventilator
and they go through these woods
which had great big long
tall blue things like trees
but without leaves and only one stalk
and they were in awe and they had to walk between them
and so on and he gradually catch on
that was the rug the nap of the rug
the blue rug and he loved this game
because I would describe all these things
from an odd point of view
and he liked to hear the stories
and we got all kinds of wonderful things
he even went into a moist cave
where the wind kept going in and out
it was coming in cool
and went out warm and so on
it was inside the dog's nose
that they went and then of course
I could tell him all about physiology by this
way and so on
he loved that
and so I told him lots of stuff
and I enjoyed it because I was
telling him stuff that I liked
and he had fun when he would guess what it was
and so on
then I have a daughter and I tried the same thing
when my daughter's personality was different
she didn't want to hear the stories
she wanted the story that was in the book
repeated again and read to her
she wanted me to read to her not to make up stories
that's a different personality
for children about science
is to make up these stories of a little people
who it doesn't work at all
on my daughter
it happened to work on my son
because of the success of science
there is a kind of
I think a kind of pseudo
science that
social science is an example of a science
which is not a science
they don't do science to be
they follow the forms
you gather data
and so on and so forth
but they don't get any laws
they haven't found anything
they haven't got anywhere yet
maybe someday they will but it's not very well developed
but what happens is
at an even more mundane level
we get experts on everything
that sounds like they're sort of scientific
expert
they're not scientific
they sit as a typewriter and they make up something like
food grown
with fertilizer
it's better for you than food grown with fertilizer
it may be true
but it hasn't been demonstrated one way or the other
where they'll sit there on the typewriter
and make up all this stuff
as if it's science and they become an expert
on foods, organic foods
there's all kinds of myths and pseudo
science all over the place
now I might be quite wrong
maybe they do know all this thing
but I don't think I'm wrong
I have the advantage
of having found out how hard it is
to really know something
how careful you have to be about checking the experiments
how easy it is to make mistakes
and fool yourself
I know what it means to know something
and therefore I can't
I see how they get their information
and I can't believe that
they know it, they haven't done the work
necessary, haven't done the checks
necessary, haven't done the care necessary
I have a great suspicion
that they don't know, that this stuff
and they're intimidating people
I think so, I don't know the world
very well but that's what I think
if you expected science
to give all the answers to the wonderful questions
about what we are
where we're going, what the meaning of the universe
is and so on
then I think you could easily become the solution
to then look for some mystic answer
to these problems
how a scientist can take a mystic answer
I don't know because the whole spirit
is to understand, well never mind that
I don't understand that
now
if you think of it though
the way I think of what we're doing is
we're exploring, we're trying to find out as much as we can
about the world
people say to me are you looking for the ultimate
laws of physics
no I'm not, I'm just looking to find out more
about the world and if it turns out there is
a simple ultimate law that explains everything
so be it that would be very nice discovery
if it turns out it's like
an onion with millions of layers
and we're just sick and tired of looking at the layers
and that's the way it is
but whatever way it comes out it's nature
is there and she's going to come out the way she is
and therefore
when we go to an investigator we shouldn't pre-decide
what it is we're trying to do
except to find out more about it
if you say but your problem is
why do you find out more about it
if you thought that you were trying to find out more about it
because you're going to get an answer to some
deep philosophical question
you may be wrong it may be that you can't get an answer
to that particular question
but it's more about the character of nature
but I don't look at it
my interest in science
is to simply find out about the world
and the more I find out
it is a
like to find out
there are very remarkable mysteries about the fact
that we're able to do so many more things
and apparently animals can do
and other questions like that
but those are mysteries I want to investigate
without knowing the answer to them
and so altogether I can't
find out more stories that have been made up
about our relationship to the universe
at large because
they seem to be
too simple, too connected
too local, too provincial
the earth, it came to the earth
one of the aspects
of God came to the earth
mind you
and look at what's out there, how can it
it isn't in proportion
anyway it's no use arguing
I can't argue it, I'm just trying to tell you
why the scientific
views do have some effect
on my belief
it also another thing
has to do with the question of how do you find out
if something's true
and if you have all these theories
of the different religions have all different theories
about the thing
then you begin to wonder, once you start
doubting, just like you're supposed to doubt
you ask me if the science is true
we say no, no, we don't know what's true
we're trying to find out, everything is possibly wrong
understanding religion by saying everything is possibly wrong
let us see
as soon as you do that, you start sliding down an edge
which is hard to recover from
and so when
with the scientific view, well my father's
view that we should look to see what's
true and what maybe
may not be true, once you start
doubting, which I think
to me is a very fundamental part of my
soul is to doubt
and to ask
when you doubt and ask, it gets a little
harder to believe
you see
one thing is
I can live without
an uncertainty and not knowing
I think it's much more interesting
to live not knowing
than to have answers which might be wrong
I have approximate answers
and possible beliefs and different degrees of
certainty about different things
but I'm not absolutely sure of anything
and then many things I don't know anything about
such as whether it means anything
I can only ask why we're here
and what the question might mean
I might think about a little but if I can't figure it out
then I go to something else
but I don't have to know an answer
I don't have, I don't feel
frightened by not knowing things
by being lost in the mysterious
universe without having any purpose
which is the way it really is
as far as I can tell possibly
it doesn't frighten me
including copying, reproducing
or performance in public in whole
or in part is prohibited by law