The Feynman Lectures on Physics Vol. II Ch. 30: The Internal Geometry of Crystals
=================================================================================

Sections: 30–1 The internal geometry of crystals | 30–2 Chemical bonds in crystals | 30–3 The growth of crystals | 30–4 Crystal lattices | 30–5 Symmetries in two dimensions | 30–6 Symmetries in three dimensions | 30–7 The strength of metals | 30–8 Dislocations and crystal growth | 30–9 The Bragg-Nye crystal model



We have finished the study of the basic laws of electricity and
magnetism, and we are now going to study the electromagnetic
properties of matter. We begin by describing solids—that is,
crystals. When the atoms of matter are not moving around very much,
they get stuck together and arrange themselves in a configuration with
as low an energy as possible. If the atoms in a certain place have
found a pattern which seems to be of low energy, then the atoms
somewhere else will probably make the same arrangement. For these
reasons, we have in a solid material a repetitive pattern of atoms.

In other words, the conditions in a crystal are this way: The
environment of a particular atom in a crystal has a certain
arrangement, and if you look at the same kind of an atom at another
place farther along, you will find one whose surroundings are exactly
the same. If you pick an atom farther along by the same distance, you
will find the conditions exactly the same once more. The pattern is
repeated over and over again—and, of course, in three dimensions.

Imagine the problem of designing a wallpaper—or a cloth, or some
geometric design for a plane area—in which you are supposed to have a
design element which repeats and repeats and repeats, so that you can
make the area as large as you want. This is the two-dimensional analog
of a problem which a crystal solves in three dimensions. For example,
Fig.  30–1 (a) shows a common kind of wallpaper design. There
is a single element repeated in a pattern that can go on forever. The
geometric characteristics of this wallpaper design, considering only its
repetition properties and not worrying about the geometry of the flower
itself or its artistic merit, are contained in
Fig.  30–1 (b). If you start at any point, you can find the
corresponding point by moving the distance [eq] along the direction of
arrow [eq]. You can also get to a corresponding point if you move
the distance [eq] in the direction of the other arrow. There are, of
course, many other directions. You can go, for example, from
point [eq] to point [eq] and reach a corresponding position, but
such a step can be considered as a combination of a step along
direction [eq], followed by a step along direction [eq]. One of the basic
properties
of the pattern can be described by the two shortest steps to nearby
equal positions. By “equal” positions we mean that if you were to
stand in any one of them and look around you, you would see exactly the
same thing as if you were to stand in another one. That’s the
fundamental property of a crystal. The only difference is that a crystal
is a three-dimensional arrangement instead of a two-dimensional
arrangement; and naturally, instead of flowers, each element of the
lattice is some kind of an arrangement of atoms—perhaps six hydrogen
atoms and two carbon atoms—in some kind of pattern. The pattern of
atoms in a crystal can be found out experimentally by x-ray
diffraction. We
have mentioned this method briefly before, and won’t say any more now
except that the precise arrangement of the atoms in space has been
worked out for most simple crystals and also for some fairly complex
ones.

The internal pattern of a crystal shows up in several ways. First, the
binding strength of the atoms in certain directions is usually
stronger than in other directions. This means that there are certain
planes through the crystal where it is more easily broken than
others. They are called the cleavage planes. If you crack a crystal with a knife blade it will often split
apart along such a plane. Second, the internal structure often appears
at the surface because of the way the crystal was formed. Imagine a
crystal being deposited out of a solution. There are the atoms floating
around in the solution and finally settling down when they find a
position of lowest energy. (It’s as if the wallpaper got made by flowers
drifting around until one drifted accidentally into place and got stuck,
and then the next, and the next so that the pattern gradually grows.)
You can appreciate that there will be certain directions in which it
will grow at a different speed than in other directions, thereby growing
into some kind of geometrical shape. Because of such effects, the
outside surfaces of many crystals show some of the character of the
internal arrangement of the atoms.

For example, Fig.  30–2 (a) shows the shape of a typical
quartz crystal whose internal pattern is hexagonal. If you look
closely at such a crystal, you will notice that the outside does not
make a very good hexagon because the sides are not all of equal
length—they are, in fact, often very unequal. But in one respect it
is a very good hexagon: the angles between the faces are
exactly [eq]. Clearly, the size of any particular face is an
accident of the growth, but the angles are a representation of
the internal geometry. So every crystal of quartz has a different
shape, even though the angles between corresponding faces are always
the same.

The internal geometry of a crystal of sodium chloride is also evident
from its external shape. Figure  30–2 (b) shows the shape
of a typical grain of salt. Again the crystal is not a perfect cube,
but the faces are exactly at right angles to one another.

A more complicated crystal is mica, which has the shape shown in
Fig.  30–2 (c). It is a highly anisotropic crystal, as is
easily seen from the fact that it is very tough if you try to pull it
apart in one direction (horizontally in the figure), but very easy to
split by pulling apart in the other direction (vertically). It has
commonly been used to obtain very tough, thin sheets. Mica and quartz
are two examples of natural minerals containing silica. A third
example of a mineral with silica is asbestos, which has the
interesting property that it is easily pulled apart in two directions
but not in the third. It appears to be made of very strong,
 linear fibers.

The mechanical properties of crystals clearly depend on the kind of
chemical bindings between the atoms. The strikingly different strength
of mica along different directions depends on the kinds of interatomic
binding in the different directions. You have already learned in
chemistry, no doubt, about the different kinds of chemical
bonds. First, there are ionic bonds, as we have
already discussed for sodium chloride. Roughly speaking, the sodium
atoms have lost an electron and become positive ions; the chlorine atoms
have gained an electron and become negative ions. The positive and
negative ions are arranged in a three-dimensional checkerboard and are
held together by electrical forces.

The covalent bond—in which electrons are shared
between two atoms—is more common and is usually very strong. In a
diamond, for example, the carbon atoms have covalent bonds in all four
directions to the nearest neighbors, so the crystal is very hard indeed.
There is also covalent bonding between silicon and oxygen in a quartz
crystal, but there the bond is really only partially covalent. Because
there is not complete sharing of the electrons, the atoms are partly
charged, and the crystal is somewhat ionic. Nature is not as simple as
we try to make it; there are really all possible gradations between
covalent and ionic bonding.

A sugar crystal has still another kind of binding. In it there are large
molecules in which the atoms are held strongly together by covalent
bonds, so that the molecule is a tough structure. But since the strong
bonds are completely satisfied, there are only relatively weak
attractions between the separate, individual molecules. In such
 molecular crystals the molecules keep their
individual identity, so to speak, and the internal arrangement might be
as shown in Fig.  30–3 . Since the molecules are not held
strongly to each other, the crystals are easy to break. They are quite
different from something like diamond, which is really one giant
molecule that cannot be broken anywhere without disrupting strong
covalent bonds. Paraffin is another example of a molecular crystal.

An extreme example of a molecular crystal occurs in a substance like
solid argon. There is very little attraction between the atoms—each
atom is a completely saturated monatomic molecule. But at very low
temperatures, the thermal motion is very small, so the slight
interatomic forces can cause the atoms to settle down into a regular
array like a pile of closely packed spheres.

The metals form a completely different class of substances. The
bonding is of an entirely different kind. In a metal the bonding is
not between adjacent atoms but is a property of the whole crystal. The
valence electrons are not attached to one atom or to a pair of atoms
but are shared throughout the crystal. Each atom contributes an
electron to a universal pool of electrons, and the atomic positive
ions reside in the sea of negative electrons. The electron sea holds
the ions together like some kind of glue.

In the metals, since there are no special bonds in any particular
direction, there is no strong directionality in the binding. They are
still crystalline, however, because the total energy is lowest when
the atomic ions are arranged in some definite array—although the
energy of the preferred arrangement is not usually much lower than
other possible ones. To a first approximation, the atoms of many
metals are like small spheres packed in as tightly as possible.

Try to imagine the natural formation of crystals in the earth. In the
earth’s surface there is a big mixture of all kinds of atoms. They are
being continually churned about by volcanic action, by wind, and by
water—continually being moved about and mixed. Yet, by some trick,
silicon atoms gradually begin to find each other, and to find oxygen
atoms, to make silica. One atom at a time is added to the others to
build up a crystal—the mixture gets unmixed. And somewhere nearby,
sodium and chlorine atoms are finding each other and building up a
crystal of salt.

How does it happen that once a crystal is started, it permits only a
particular kind of atom to join on? It happens because the whole
system is working toward the lowest possible energy. A growing crystal
will accept a new atom if it is going to make the energy as low as
possible. But how does it know that a silicon—or an
oxygen—atom at some particular spot is going to result in the lowest
possible energy? It does it by trial and error. In the liquid, all of
the atoms are in perpetual motion. Each atom bounces against its
neighbors about [eq] times every second. If it hits against the
right spot of growing crystal, it has a somewhat smaller chance of
jumping off again if the energy is low. By continually testing over
periods of millions of years at a rate of [eq] tests per second,
the atoms gradually build up at the places where they find their
lowest energy. Eventually they grow into big crystals.

The arrangement of the atoms in a crystal—the crystal
 lattice —can take on many geometric forms. We would like to
describe first the simplest lattices, which are characteristic of most
of the metals and of the solid form of the inert gases. They are the
cubic lattices which can occur in two forms: the body-centered cubic,
shown in Fig.  30–4 (a), and the face-centered cubic
shown in Fig.  30–4 (b). The drawings show, of course,
only one cube of the lattice; you are to imagine that the pattern is
repeated indefinitely in three dimensions. Also, to make the drawing
clearer, only the “centers” of the atoms are shown. In an actual
crystal, the atoms are more like spheres in contact with each
other. The dark and light spheres in the drawings may, in general,
stand for different kinds of atoms or may be the same kind. For
instance, iron has a body-centered cubic lattice at low temperatures,
but a face-centered cubic lattice at higher temperatures. The physical
properties are quite different in the two crystalline forms.

How do such forms come about? Imagine that you have the problem of
packing spherical atoms together as tightly as possible. One way would
be to start by making a layer in a “hexagonal close-packed array,”
as shown in Fig.  30–5 (a). Then you could build up a
second layer like the first, but displaced horizontally, as shown in
Fig.  30–5 (b). Next, you can put on the third layer. But
notice! There are two distinct ways of placing the
 third layer. If you start the third layer by placing an atom
at [eq] in Fig.  30–5 (b), each atom in the third layer is
directly above an atom of the bottom layer. On the other hand, if you
start the third layer by putting an atom at the position [eq], the
atoms of the third layer will be centered at points exactly in the
middle of a triangle formed by three atoms of the bottom layer. Any
other starting place is equivalent to [eq] or [eq], so there are only
two ways of placing the third layer.

If the third layer has an atom at point [eq], the crystal lattice is a
face-centered cubic—but seen at an angle. It seems funny that
starting with hexagons you can end up with cubes. But notice that a
cube looked at from a corner has a hexagonal outline. For instance,
Fig.  30–6 could represent a plane hexagon or a cube
seen in perspective!

If a third layer is added to Fig.  30–5 (b) by starting
with an atom at [eq], there is no cubical structure, and the lattice
has instead only a hexagonal symmetry. It is clear that both
possibilities we have described are equally close-packed.

Some metals—for example, copper and silver—choose the first
alternative, the face-centered cubic. Others—for example, beryllium
and magnesium—choose the other alternatives; they form hexagonal
crystals. Clearly, which crystal lattice appears cannot depend only on
the packing of little spheres, but must also be determined in part by
other factors. In particular, it depends on the slight remaining
angular dependence of the interatomic forces (or, in the case of the
metals, on the energy of the electron pool). You will, no doubt, learn
all about such things in your chemistry courses.

We would now like to discuss some of the properties of crystals from
the point of view of their internal symmetries. The main feature of a
crystal is that if you start at one atom and move to a corresponding
atom one lattice unit away, you are again in the same kind of an
environment. That’s the fundamental proposition. But if you were an
atom, there would be another kind of change that could take you again
to the same environment—that is, another possible “symmetry.”
Figure  30–7 (a) shows another possible “wallpaper-type” design
(though one you have probably never seen). Suppose we compare the
environments for points [eq] and [eq]. You might, at first, think that
they are the same—but not quite. Points [eq] and [eq] are equivalent
to [eq], but the environment of [eq] is like that of [eq] only if the
surroundings are reversed, as in a mirror reflection.

There are other kinds of “equivalent” points in the pattern. For
instance, the points [eq] and [eq] have the “same” environments except
that one is rotated [eq] with respect to the other. The pattern
is quite special. A rotation of [eq]—or any multiple of
it—about a vertex such as [eq] gives the same pattern all over
again. A crystal with such a structure would have square corners on
the outside, but inside it is more complicated than a simple cube.

Now that we have described some special examples, let’s try to figure
out all the possible symmetries a crystal can have. First, we consider
what happens in a plane. A plane lattice can
be defined by the two so-called primitive vectors that go from
one point of the lattice to the two nearest equivalent points.
The two vectors [eq] and [eq] are the primitive vectors of the
lattice of Fig.  30–1 . The two vectors [eq] and [eq]
of Fig.  30–7 (a) are the primitive vectors of the pattern
there. We could, of course, equally well replace [eq] by [eq], or
[eq] by [eq]. Since [eq] and [eq] are equal in magnitude
and at right angles, a rotation of [eq] turns [eq]
into [eq], and [eq] into [eq], giving the same lattice once
again.

We see that there are lattices which have a “four-sided”
symmetry. And we have described earlier a close-packed array based on
a hexagon which could have a six-sided symmetry. A rotation of the
array of circles in Fig.  30–5 (a) by an angle
of [eq] about the center of any circle brings the pattern back to
itself.

What other kinds of rotational symmetry are there? Can we have, for
example, a fivefold or an eightfold rotational symmetry? It is easy to
see that they are impossible. The only symmetry with more sides
than four is a six-sided symmetry . First, let’s show that more than
sixfold symmetry is impossible. Suppose we try to imagine a lattice with
two equal primitive vectors with an enclosed angle less than [eq],
as in Fig.  30–8 (a). We are to suppose that points [eq]
and [eq] are equivalent to [eq], and that [eq] and [eq] are the two
 shortest vectors from [eq] to its equivalent neighbors. But that
is clearly wrong, because the distance between [eq] and [eq] is shorter
than from either one to [eq]. There must be a neighbor at [eq] equivalent
to [eq] which is closer than [eq] or [eq]. We should have chosen [eq]
as one of our primitive vectors. So the angle between the two primitive
vectors must be [eq] or larger. Octagonal symmetry is not
possible.

What about fivefold symmetry? If we assume that the primitive vectors
[eq] and [eq] have equal lengths and make an angle
of [eq], as in Fig.  30–8 (b), then there should also be
an
equivalent lattice point at [eq], at [eq] from [eq]. But the
vector [eq] from [eq] to [eq] is then less than [eq], so [eq]
is not a primitive vector. There can be no fivefold symmetry. The only
possibilities that do not get us into this kind of difficulty are
[eq], [eq], or [eq]. Zero or [eq] are
also clearly possible. One way of stating our result is that the
pattern can be left unchanged by a rotation of one full turn (no
change at all), one-half of a turn, one-third, one-fourth, or
one-sixth of a turn. And those are all the possible rotational
symmetries in a plane—a total of five. If [eq], we speak
of an “[eq]-fold” symmetry. We say that a pattern with [eq] equal
to [eq] or to [eq] has a “higher symmetry” than one with [eq] equal to [eq]
or to [eq].

Returning to Fig.  30–7 (a), we see that the pattern has a fourfold
rotational symmetry. We have drawn in Fig.  30–7 (b) another design
which has the same symmetry properties as part (a). The little
comma-like figures are asymmetric objects which serve to define the
symmetry of the design inside of each square. Notice that the commas
are reversed in alternate squares, so that the unit cell is larger
than one of the small squares. If there were no commas, the pattern
would still have fourfold symmetry, but the unit cell would be
smaller. The patterns of Fig.  30–7 also have other symmetry
properties. For instance, a reflection about any of the broken
lines [eq]–[eq] reproduces the same pattern.

The patterns of Fig.  30–7 have still another kind of symmetry. If
the pattern is reflected about the line [eq]–[eq] and shifted
one square to the right (or left), we get back the original
pattern. The line [eq]–[eq] is called a “glide” line.

These are all the possible symmetries in two dimensions. There is one
more spatial symmetry operation which is equivalent in two
dimensions to a [eq] rotation, but which is a quite distinct
operation in three dimensions. It is inversion . By an inversion
we mean that any point at the vector displacement [eq] from some
origin [for instance, the point [eq] in Fig.  30–9 (b)] is moved to
the point at [eq].

An inversion of pattern (a) of Fig.  30–9 produces a new pattern,
but an inversion of pattern (b) reproduces the same pattern. For a
two-dimensional pattern (as you can see from the figure), an inversion
of the pattern (b) through the point [eq] is equivalent to a rotation
of [eq] about the same point. Suppose, however, we make the
pattern in Fig.  30–9 (b) three dimensional by imagining that the
little [eq]’s and [eq]’s each have an “arrow” pointing out of
the page . After an inversion in three dimensions all the arrows will
be reversed, so the pattern is not reproduced. If we indicate
the heads and tails of the arrows by dots and crosses, respectively,
we can make a three-dimensional pattern, as in Fig.  30–9 (c),
which is not symmetric under an inversion, or we can make a
pattern like the one shown in (d), which does have such a
symmetry. Notice that it is not possible to imitate a
three-dimensional inversion by any combination of rotations.

If we characterize the “symmetry” of a pattern—or lattice—by the
kinds of symmetry operations we have been describing, it turns out that
for two dimensions [eq] distinct patterns are possible. We have drawn
one pattern of the lowest possible symmetry in Fig.  30–1 ,
and one of high symmetry in Fig.  30–7 . We will leave you
with the game of trying to figure out all of the [eq] possible patterns.

It is peculiar how few of the [eq] possible patterns are used in
making wallpaper and fabrics. One always sees the same three or four
basic patterns. Is this because of a lack of imagination of designers,
or because many of the possible patterns are not pleasing to the eye?

So far we have talked only about patterns in two dimensions. What we are
really interested in, however, are patterns of atoms in three
dimensions. First, it is clear that a three-dimensional crystal will
have three primitive vectors. If we then ask about the possible
symmetry operations in three dimensions, we find that there are
[eq] different possible symmetries! For some purposes, these
[eq] types can be grouped into seven classes, which are drawn in
Fig.  30–10 . The lattice with the least symmetry is called
the triclinic . Its unit cell is a parallelepiped. The
primitive vectors are of different lengths, and no two of the angles
between them are equal. There is no possibility of any rotational or
reflection symmetry. There are, however, still two possible
symmetries—the unit cell is, or is not, changed by an inversion
through the vertex. (By an inversion in three dimensions, we again mean
that spatial displacements [eq] are replaced by [eq]—in other
words, that [eq] goes into [eq]). So the triclinic lattice
has only two possible symmetries, unless there is some special relation
among the primitive vectors. For example, if all the vectors are equal
and are separated by equal angles, one has the trigonal 
lattice
shown in the figure. This figure can have an additional symmetry; it may
be unchanged by a rotation about the long, body diagonal.

If one of the primitive vectors, say [eq], is at right angles to the
other two, we get a monoclinic unit cell. A new
symmetry is possible—a rotation by [eq] about [eq]. The
 hexagonal cell is a special case in which the vectors [eq]
and [eq] are equal and the angle between them is [eq], so that
a rotation of [eq], or [eq], or [eq] about the
vector [eq] repeats the same lattice (for certain internal
symmetries).

If all three primitive vectors are at right angles, but of different
lengths, we get the orthorhombic cell. The figure is
symmetric for rotations of [eq] about the three axes. Higher-order
symmetries are possible with the tetragonal cell, which has all right
angles and two equal primitive vectors. Finally, there is the
 cubic cell, which is the most symmetric of all.

The point of all this discussion about symmetries is that the internal
symmetries of the crystals show up—sometimes in subtle ways—in the
macroscopic physical properties of the crystal. For instance, a
crystal will, in general, have a tensor electric polarizability. If we
describe the tensor in terms of the ellipsoid of polarization, we
should expect that some of the crystal symmetries should show up also
in the ellipsoid. For example, a cubic crystal is symmetric with
respect to a rotation of [eq] about any one of three orthogonal
directions. Clearly, the only ellipsoid with this property is a
sphere. A cubic crystal must be an isotropic dielectric .

On the other hand, a tetragonal crystal has a fourfold rotational
symmetry. Its ellipsoid must have two of its principal axes equal, and
the third must be parallel to the axis of the crystal. Similarly,
since the orthorhombic crystal has twofold rotational symmetry about
three orthogonal axes, its axes must coincide with the axes of the
polarization ellipsoid. In a like manner, one of the axes of a
monoclinic crystal must be parallel to one of the principal
axes of the ellipsoid, though we can’t say anything about the other
axes. Since a triclinic crystal has no rotational symmetry, the
ellipsoid can have any orientation at all.

As you can see, we can make a big game of figuring out the possible
symmetries and relating them to the possible physical tensors. We have
considered only the polarization tensor, but things get more
complicated for others—for instance, for the tensor of
elasticity. There is a branch of mathematics called “group theory”
that deals with such subjects, but usually you can figure out what you
want with common sense.

We have said that metals usually have a simple cubic crystal
structure; we want now to discuss their mechanical properties—which
depend on this structure. Metals are, generally speaking, very
“soft,” because it is easy to slide one layer of the crystal over
the next. You may think: “That’s ridiculous; metals are strong.” Not
so, a single crystal of a metal can be distorted very easily.

Suppose we look at two layers of a crystal subjected to a shear force,
as shown in the diagram of Fig.  30–11 (a). You might at first think
the whole layer would resist motion until the force was big enough to
push the whole layer “over the hump,” so that it shifted one notch
to the left. Although slipping does occur along a plane, it doesn’t
happen that way. (If it did, you would calculate that the metal is
much stronger than it really is.) What happens is more like one atom
going at a time; first the atom on the left makes its jump, then the
next, and so on, as indicated in Fig.  30–11 (b). In effect it is the
vacant space between two atoms that quickly travels to the right, with
the net result that the whole second layer has moved over one atomic
spacing. The slipping goes this way because it takes much less energy
to lift one atom at a time over the hump than to lift a whole
row. Once the force is enough to start the process, it goes the rest
of the way very fast.

It turns out that in a real crystal, slipping will occur repeatedly at
one plane, then will stop there and start at some other plane. The
details of why it starts and stops are quite mysterious. It is, in
fact, quite strange that successive regions of slip are often fairly
evenly spaced. Figure  30–12 shows a photograph of a tiny thin
copper
crystal that has been stretched. You can see the various planes where
slipping has occurred.

The sudden slipping of individual crystal planes is quite apparent if
you take a piece of tin wire that has large crystals in it and stretch
it while holding it next to your ear. You can hear a rush of “ticks”
as the planes snap to their new positions, one after the other.

The problem of having a “missing” atom in one row is somewhat more
difficult than it might appear from Fig.  30–11 . When there
are more layers, the situation must be something like that shown in
Fig.  30–13 . Such an imperfection in a crystal is called a
 dislocation . It is presumed that such
dislocations are either present when the crystal was formed or are
generated at some notch or crack at the surface. Once they are produced,
they can move relatively freely through the crystal. The gross
distortions result from the motions of many of such dislocations.

Dislocations can move freely—that is, they require little extra
energy—so long as the rest of the crystal has a perfect lattice. But
they may get “stuck” if they encounter some other kind of
imperfection in the crystal. If it takes a lot of energy for them to
pass the imperfection, they will be stopped. This is precisely the
mechanism that gives strength to imperfect metal crystals. Pure
iron crystals are quite soft, but a small concentration of impurity
atoms may cause enough imperfections to effectively immobilize the
dislocations. As you know, steel, which is primarily iron, is very
hard. To make steel, a small amount of carbon is dissolved in the iron
melt; if the melt is cooled rapidly, the carbon precipitates out in
little grains, making many microscopic distortions in the lattice. The
dislocations can no longer move about, and the metal is hard.

Pure copper is very soft, but can be “work-hardened.” This is done
by hammering on it or bending it back and forth. In this case, many
new dislocations of various kinds are made which interfere with one
another, cutting down their mobility. Perhaps you’ve seen the trick of
taking a bar of “dead soft” copper and gently bending it around
someone’s wrist as a bracelet. In the process, it becomes
work-hardened and cannot easily be unbent again! A work-hardened metal
like copper can be made soft again by annealing at a high
temperature. The thermal motion of the atoms “irons out” the
dislocations and makes large single crystals again. We have, so far,
described only the so-called slip dislocation. There are many other kinds,
one of which is the screw dislocation shown in
Fig.  30–14 . Such dislocations often play an important part
in crystal growth.

One of the great puzzles for a long time was how crystals can possibly
grow. We have described how it is that each atom might, by repeated
testing, determine whether it was better to be in the crystal or not.
But that means that each atom must find a place of low energy. However,
an atom put on a new surface is only bound by one or two bonds from
below, and doesn’t have the same energy it would have if it were placed
in a corner, where it would have atoms on three sides. Suppose we
imagine a growing crystal as a stack of blocks, as shown in
Fig.  30–15 . If we try a new block at, say, position [eq], it
will have only one of the six neighbors it should ultimately get. With
so many bonds lacking, its energy is not very low. It would be better
off at position [eq], where it already has one-half of its quota of
bonds. Crystals do indeed grow by attaching new atoms at places
like [eq].

What happens, though, when that line is finished? To start a new line,
an atom must come to rest with only two sides attached, and that is
again not very likely. Even if it did, what would happen when the
layer was finished? How could a new layer get started? One answer is
that the crystal prefers to grow at a dislocation, for instance around
a screw dislocation like the one shown in Fig.  30–14 . As blocks are
added to this crystal, there is always some place where there are three
available bonds. The crystal prefers, therefore, to grow with a
dislocation built in. Such a spiral pattern of growth is shown in
Fig.  30–16 , which is a photograph of a single crystal of
paraffin.

We cannot, of course, see what goes on with the individual atoms in a crystal.
Also, as you realize by now, there are many complicated phenomena that are not
easy to treat quantitatively. Sir Lawrence Bragg and J. F. Nye
have devised a scheme for making a model of a metallic crystal which
shows in a striking way many of the phenomena that are believed to occur in a
real metal. In the following pages we have reproduced their original article,
which describes their method and shows some of the results they obtained with
it. (The article is reprinted from the Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London, Vol. 190, September 1947, pp. 474–481—with the permission of the
authors and of the Royal Society.) 1

Models of crystal structure have been described from time to time in
which the atoms are represented by small floating or suspended magnets, or by
circular disks floating on a water surface and held together by the forces of
capillary attraction. These models have certain disadvantages; for instance, in
the case of floating objects in contact, frictional forces impede their free
relative movement. A more serious disadvantage is that the number of components
is limited, for a large number of components is required in order to approach
the state of affairs in a real crystal. The present paper describes the
behaviour of a model in which the atoms are represented by small bubbles from
[eq] to [eq] mm. in diameter floating on the
surface of a soap solution. These small bubbles are sufficiently persistent for
experiments lasting an hour or more, they slide past each other without
friction, and they can be produced in large numbers. Some of the illustrations
in this paper were taken from assemblages of bubbles numbering [eq] or
more. The model most nearly represents the behaviour of a metal structure,
because the bubbles are of one type only and are held together by a general
capillary attraction, which represents the binding force of the free electrons
in the metal. A brief description of the model has been given in the
 Journal of Scientific Instruments (Bragg 1942 b ).

The bubbles are blown from a fine orifice, beneath the surface of a soap
solution. We have had the best results with a solution the formula of which was
given to us by Mr Green of the Royal Institution. [eq] c.c.
of oleic acid (pure redistilled) is well shaken in [eq] c.c. of
distilled water. This is mixed thoroughly with [eq] c.c. of 10%
solution of tri-ethanolamine and the mixture made up to [eq] c.c. To this is
added [eq] c.c. of pure glycerine. It is left to stand and the clear
liquid is drawn off from below. In some experiments this was diluted in three
times its volume of water to reduce viscosity. The orifice of the jet is about
[eq] mm. below the surface. A constant air pressure of [eq]
to [eq] cm. of water is supplied by means of two Winchester flasks.
Normally the bubbles are remarkably uniform in size. Occasionally they issue in
an irregular manner, but this can be corrected by a change of jet or of
pressure. Unwanted bubbles can easily be destroyed by playing a small flame over
the surface. Figure 1 shows the apparatus. We have found it of advantage to
blacken the bottom of the vessel, because details of structure, such as grain
boundaries and dislocations, then show up more clearly.

Figure 2, plate 8, shows a portion of a raft or two-dimensional crystal of
bubbles. Its regularity can be judged by looking at the figure in a glancing
direction. The size of the bubbles varies with the aperture, but does not appear
to vary to any marked degree with the pressure or the depth of the orifice
beneath the surface. The main effect of increasing the pressure is to increase
the rate of issue of the bubbles. As an example, a thick-walled jet of
[eq] [eq] bore with a pressure of [eq] cm. produced bubbles of
[eq] mm. in diameter. A thin-walled jet of [eq] [eq]
diameter and a pressure of [eq] cm. produced bubbles of
[eq] mm. diameter. It is convenient to refer to bubbles of
[eq] to [eq] mm. diameter as ‘large’ bubbles,
those from [eq] to [eq] mm. diameter as ‘medium’
bubbles, and those from [eq] to [eq] mm.
diameter as ‘small’ bubbles, since their behaviour varies with their size.

With this apparatus we have not found it possible to reduce the size of the jet
and so produce bubbles of smaller diameter than [eq] mm. As it was
desired to experiment with very small bubbles, we had recourse to placing the
soap solution in a rotating vessel and introducing a fine jet as nearly as
possible parallel to a stream line. The bubbles are swept away as they form, and
under steady conditions are reasonably uniform. They issue at a rate of one
thousand or more per second, giving a high-pitched note. The soap solution
mounts up in a steep wall around the perimeter of the vessel while it is
rotating, but carries back most of the bubbles with it when rotation ceases.
With this device, illustrated in figure 3, bubbles down to
[eq] mm. in diameter can be obtained. As an example, an
orifice [eq] [eq] across in a thin-walled jet, with a pressure of
[eq] cm. of water, and a speed of the fluid of [eq] cm./sec.
past the orifice, produced bubbles of [eq] mm. diameter. In
this case a dish of diameter [eq] cm. and speed of
[eq] rev./sec. was used. Figure 4, plate 8, is an enlarged picture of
these ‘small’ bubbles and shows their degree of regularity; the pattern is not
as perfect with a rotating as with a stationary vessel, the rows being seen to
be slightly irregular when viewed in a glancing direction.

These two-dimensional crystals show structures which have been
supposed to exist in metals, and simulate effects which have been
observed, such as grain boundaries, dislocations and other types of
fault, slip, recrystallization, annealing, and strains due to
‘foreign’ atoms.

Figures 5 a , 5 b and 5 c , plates 9 and 10, show typical
grain boundaries for bubbles of [eq], [eq]
and [eq] mm. diameter respectively. The width of the
disturbed area at the boundary, where the bubbles have an irregular
distribution, is in general greater the smaller the bubbles. In
figure 5 a , which shows portions of several adjacent grains, bubbles at
a boundary between two grains adhere definitely to one crystalline arrangement
or the other. In figure 5 c there is a marked ‘Beilby layer’ between the
two grains. The small bubbles, as will be seen, have a greater rigidity than the
large ones, and this appears to give rise to more irregularity at the interface.

Separate grains show up distinctly when photographs of polycrystalline
rafts such as figures 5 a to 5 c , plates 9 and 10, and
figures 12 a to 12 e , plates 14 to 16, are viewed
obliquely. With suitable lighting, the floating raft of bubbles itself
when viewed obliquely resembles a polished and etched metal in a
remarkable way.

It often happens that some ‘impurity atoms’, or bubbles which are
markedly larger or smaller than the average, are found in a
polycrystalline raft, and when this is so a large proportion of them
are situated at the grain boundaries. It would be incorrect to say
that the irregular bubbles make their way to the boundaries; it is a
defect of the model that no diffusion of bubbles through the structure
can take place, mutual adjustments of neighbours alone being
possible. It appears that the boundaries tend to readjust themselves
by the growth of one crystal at the expense of another till they pass
through the irregular atoms.

When a single crystal or polycrystalline raft is compressed, extended,
or otherwise deformed it exhibits a behaviour very similar to that
which has been pictured for metals subjected to strain. Up to a
certain limit the model is within its elastic range. Beyond that point
it yields by slip along one of the three equally inclined directions
of closely packed rows. Slip takes place by the bubbles in one row
moving forward over those in the next row by an amount equal to the
distance between neighbours. It is very interesting to watch this
process taking place. The movement is not simultaneous along the whole
row but begins at one end with the appearance of a ‘dislocation’,
where there is locally one more bubble in the rows on one side of the
slip line as compared with those on the other. This dislocation then
runs along the slip line from one side of the crystal to the other,
the final result being a slip by one ‘inter-atomic’ distance. Such a
process has been invoked by Orowan, by Polanyi and by Taylor to
explain the small forces required to produce plastic gliding in metal
structures. The theory put forward by Taylor (1934) to explain the
mechanism of plastic deformation of crystals considers the mutual
action and equilibrium of such dislocations. The bubbles afford a very
striking picture of what has been supposed to take place in the
metal. Sometimes the dislocations run along quite slowly, taking a
matter of seconds to cross a crystal; stationary dislocations also are
to be seen in crystals which are not homogeneously strained. They
appear as short black lines, and can be seen in the series of
photographs, figures 12 a to 12 e , plates 14 to 16. When
a polycrystalline raft is compressed, these dark lines are seen to be
dashing about in all directions across the crystals.

Figures 6 a , 6 b and 6 c , plates 10 and 11,
show examples of dislocations. In figure 6 a , where the
diameter of the bubbles is [eq] mm., the dislocation is
very local, extending over about six bubbles. In figure 6 b 
(diameter [eq] mm.) it extends over twelve bubbles, and
in figure 6 c (diameter [eq] mm.) its influence
can be traced for a length of about fifty bubbles. The greater
rigidity of the small bubbles leads to longer dislocations. The study
of any mass of bubbles shows, however, that there is not a standard
length of dislocation for each size. The length depends upon the
nature of the strain in the crystal. A boundary between two crystals
with corresponding axes at approximately [eq] (the maximum angle
which can occur) may be regarded as a series of dislocations in
alternate rows, and in this case the dislocations are very short. As
the angle between the neighbouring crystals decreases, the
dislocations occur at wider intervals and at the same time become
longer, till one finally has single dislocations in a large body of
perfect structure as shown in figures 6 a , 6 b 
and 6 c .

Figure 7, plate 11, shows three parallel dislocations. If we call them
positive and negative (following Taylor) they are positive, negative,
positive, reading from left to right. The strip between the last two
has three bubbles in excess, as can be seen by looking along the rows
in a horizontal direction. Figure 8, plate 12, shows a dislocation
projecting from a grain boundary, an effect often observed.

Figure 9, plate 12, shows a place where two bubbles take the place of
one. This may be regarded as a limiting case of positive and negative
dislocations on neighbouring rows, with the compressive sides of the
dislocations facing each other. The contrary case would lead to a hole
in the structure, one bubble being missing at the point where the
dislocations met.

Figure 10, plate 12, shows a narrow strip between two crystals of
parallel orientation, the strip being crossed by a number of fault
lines where the bubbles are not in close packing. It is in such places
as these that recrystallization may be expected. The boundaries
approach and the strip is absorbed into a wider area of perfect
crystal.

Figures 11 a to 11 g , plates 13 and 14 are examples of
arrangements which frequently appear in places where there is a local
deficiency of bubbles. While a dislocation is seen as a dark stripe in
a general view, these structures show up in the shape of the letter
 V or as triangles. A typical V structure is seen in
figure 11 a . When the model is being distorted, a V 
structure is formed by two dislocations meeting at an inclination
of [eq]; it is destroyed by the dislocations continuing along their
paths. Figure 11 b shows a small triangle, which also embodies
a dislocation, for it will be noticed that the rows below the fault
have one more bubble than these below. If a mild amount of ‘thermal
movement’ is imposed by gentle agitation of one side of the crystal,
such faulty places disappear and a perfect structure is formed.

Here and there in the crystals there is a blank space where a bubble
is missing, showing as a black dot in a general view. Examples occur
in figure 11 g . Such a gap cannot be closed by a local
readjustment, since filling the hole causes another to appear. Such
holes both appear and disappear when the crystal is
‘cold-worked’. These structures in the model suggest that similar
local faults may exist in an actual metal. They may play a part in
processes such as diffusion or the order-disorder change by reducing
energy barriers in their neighbourhood, and act as nuclei for
crystallization in an allotropic change.

Figures 12 a to 12 e , plates 14 to 16, show the same raft of
bubbles at successive times. A raft covering the surface of the solution was
given a vigorous stirring with a glass rake, and then left to adjust itself.
Figure 12 a shows its aspect about [eq] sec. after stirring has
ceased. The raft is broken into a number of small ‘crystallites’; these are in a
high state of non-homogeneous strain as is shown by the numerous dislocations
and other faults. The following photograph (figure 12 b ) shows the same
raft [eq] sec. later. The small grains have coalesced to form larger
grains, and much of the strain has disappeared in the process. Recrystallization
takes place right through the series, the last three photographs of which show
the appearance of the raft [eq], [eq] and [eq] min. after the initial
stirring. It is not possible to follow the rearrangement for much longer times,
because the bubbles shrink after long standing, apparently due to the diffusion
of air through their walls, and they also become thin and tend to burst. No
agitation was given to the model during this process. An ever slower process of
rearrangement goes on, the movement of the bubbles in one part of the raft
setting up strains which activate a rearrangement in a neighbouring part, and
that in its turn still another.

A number of interesting points are to be seen in this series. Note the
three small grains at the points indicated by the co-ordinates [eq],
[eq], [eq]. [eq] persists, though changed in form, throughout the whole
series. [eq] is still present after [eq] min., but has disappeared in
[eq] min., leaving behind it four dislocations marking internal strain
in the grain. Grain [eq] shrinks and finally disappears in
figure 12 d , leaving a hole and a V which has
disappeared in figure 12 e . At the same time the ill-defined
boundary in figure 12 d at [eq] has become a definite one in
figure 12 e . Note also the straightening out of the grain
boundary in the neighbourhood of [eq] in figures 12 b 
to 12 e . Dislocations of various lengths can be seen, marking
all stages between a slight warping of the structure and a definite
boundary. Holes where bubbles are missing show up as black dots. Some of
these holes are formed or filled up by movements of dislocations, but
others represent places where a bubble has burst. Many examples of
 V ’s and some of triangles can be seen. Other interesting points
will be apparent from a study of this series of photographs.

Figures 13 a , 13 b and 13 c , plate 17, show a portion of
a raft [eq] sec., [eq] sec. and [eq] min. after the stirring
process, and is interesting as showing two successive stages in the relaxation
towards a more perfect arrangement. The changes show up well when one looks in a
glancing direction across the page. The arrangement is very broken in
figure 13 a . In figure 13 b the bubbles have grouped themselves
in rows, but the curvature of these rows indicates a high degree of internal
strain. In figure 13 c this strain has been relieved by the formation of
a new boundary at [eq]–[eq], the rows on either side now being straight. It would
appear that the energy of this strained crystal is greater than that of the
intercrystalline boundary. We are indebted to Messrs Kodak for the photographs
of figure 13, which were taken when the cinematograph film referred to below was
produced.

Figure 14, plate 18, shows the widespread effect of a bubble which is
of the wrong size. If this figure is compared with the perfect rafts
shown in figures 2 and 4, plate 8, it will be seen that three bubbles,
one larger and two smaller than normal, disturb the regularity of the
rows over the whole of the figure. As has been mentioned above,
bubbles of the wrong size are generally found in the grain boundaries,
where holes of irregular size occur which can accommodate them.

The mechanical properties of a two-dimensional perfect raft have been
described in the paper referred to above (Bragg 1942 b ). The
raft lies between two parallel springs dipping horizontally in the
surface of the soap solution. The pitch of the springs is adjusted to
fit the spacing of the rows of bubbles, which then adhere firmly to
them. One spring can be translated parallel to itself by a micrometer
screw, and the other is supported by two thin vertical glass
fibres. The shearing stress can be measured by noting the deflexion of
the glass fibres. When subjected to a shearing strain, the raft obeys
Hooke’s law of elasticity up to the
point where the elastic limit is
reached. It then slips along some intermediate row by an amount equal
to the width of one bubble. The elastic shear and slip can be repeated
several times. The elastic limit is approximately reached when one
side of the raft has been sheared by an amount equal to a bubble width
past the other side. This feature supports the basic assumption made
by one of us in the calculation of the elastic limit of a metal (Bragg
1942 a ), in which it is supposed that each crystallite in a
cold-worked metal only yields when the strain in it has reached such a
value that energy is released by the slip.

A calculation has been made by M. M. Nicolson of the forces between the
bubbles, and will be published shortly. It shows two interesting points. The
curve for the variation of potential energy with distance between centres is
very similar to those which have been plotted for atoms. It has a minimum for a
distance between centres slightly less than a free bubble diameter, and rises
sharply for smaller distances. Further, the rise is extremely sharp for bubbles
of [eq] mm. diameter but much less so for bubbles
of [eq] mm. diameter, thus confirming the impression given by the model
that the small bubbles behave as if they were much more rigid than the large
ones.

If the bubbles are allowed to accumulate in multiple layers on the
surface, they form a mass of three-dimensional ‘crystals’ with one of
the arrangements of closest packing. Figure 15, plate 18, shows an
oblique view of such a mass; its resemblance to a polished and etched
metal surface is noticeable. In figure 16, plate 20, a similar mass is
seen viewed normally. Parts of the structure are definitely in cubic
closest packing, the outer surface being the [eq] face or [eq]
face. Figure 17 a , plate 19, shows a [eq] face. The
outlines of the three bubbles on which each upper bubble rests can be
clearly seen, and the next layer of these bubbles is faintly visible
in a position not beneath the uppermost layer, showing that the
packing of the [eq] planes has the well-known cubic
succession. Figure 17 b , plate 19, shows a [eq] face with
each bubble resting on four others. The cubic axes are of course
inclined at [eq] to the close-packed rows of the surface
layer. Figure 17 c , plate 19, shows a twin in the cubic
structure across the face [eq]. The uppermost faces are [eq] and
[eq], and they make a small angle with each other, though this is
not apparent in the figure; it shows up in an oblique view.
Figure 17 d , plate 19, appears to show both the cubic and
hexagonal succession of closely packed planes, but it is difficult to
verify whether the left-hand side follows the true hexagonal
close-packed structure because it is not certain that the assemblage had
a depth of more than two layers at this point. Many instances of twins,
and of intercrystalline boundaries, can be seen in figure 16, plate 20.

Figure 18, plate 21, shows several dislocations in a three-dimensional
structure subjected to a bending strain.

With the co-operation of Messrs Kodak, a [eq] mm. cinematograph film has
been made of the movements of the dislocations and grain boundaries when single
crystal and polycrystalline rafts are sheared, compressed, or extended.
Moreover, if the soap solution is placed in a glass vessel with a flat bottom,
the model lends itself to projection on a large scale by transmitted light.
Since a certain depth is required for producing the bubbles, and the solution is
rather opaque, it is desirable to make the projection through a glass block
resting on the bottom of the vessel and just submerged beneath the surface.

In conclusion, we wish to express our thanks to Mr C. E. Harrold, of
King’s College, Cambridge, who made for us some of the pipettes which were used
to produce the bubbles.